Modify rule S2259: Expand and adjust for LaYC (#2939)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S2259/cfamily/rule.adoc

> Dereferencing a null pointer results in the undefined behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dereferencing a null pointer results in undefined behavior.
```

== Why is this an issue?

> A pointer to null, known also as a null pointer, is created by initializing a pointer object to `0`, `NULL`, or in the case of C++ `nullptr`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A pointer to null, also known as a null pointer, is created by initializing a pointer object to `0`, `NULL`, or in case of C++ `nullptr`.
```

> Such a pointer does not point to an object or valid memory, and as a consequence dereferencing or accessing the memory pointed by such a pointer has undefined behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A null pointer does neither point to an object nor to valid memory, and as a consequence dereferencing or accessing the memory pointed by such a pointer is undefined behavior.
```

[source,c]
----
int deref() {
  int* ptr = 0;

>   return *ptr; // Noncompliant, deference of null pointer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return *ptr; // Noncompliant, deference of null pointer
```
```suggestion
  return *ptr; // Noncompliant: deference of a null pointer
```

}
----

> In addition to using an `*` operator, accessing a member of the structure (using `->`) or element of an array (using `[]`) leads to dereference of the pointer,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to using the `*` operator, accessing a member of a structure (using `->`) or an element of an array (using `[]`) also leads to dereference of the pointer,
```

> and cause undefined behavior if performed on a pointer to null.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and causes undefined behavior if performed on a pointer to null.
```

[source,c]
----
int subscript() {
  int* ptr = 0;

>   return ptr[2]; // Noncompliant, subscript of null pointer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return ptr[2]; // Noncompliant: subscript operator used on null pointer
```

}
----

[source,c]
----
struct Aggregate {
  int x;
  int y;
};

int memberAccess() {
  struct Aggregate* ptr = 0;

>   return ptr->x; // Noncompliant, member access on a null pointer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return ptr->x; // Noncompliant, member access on a null pointer
```
```suggestion
  return ptr->x; // Noncompliant: member access on a null pointer
```

}
----

> Finally, invoking a function pointer that points to null, dereferences the pointer and results in undefined behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, invoking a function pointer that holds a null value, dereferences the pointer and too results in undefined behavior.
```

[source,c]
----
void call() {

>   void (*func)(int) = NULL; // func is pointer to function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  void (*func)(int) = NULL; // func is a pointer to a function
```

>   func(10); // Noncompliant, invocation of null function pointer 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  func(10); // Noncompliant, invocation of null function pointer 
```
```suggestion
  func(10); // Noncompliant: invocation of a null function pointer 
```

}
----

== What is the potential impact?

> The behavior of a program that deferences a null pointer results in undefined behavior, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The behavior of a program that deferences a null pointer results in undefined behavior.
```

Reviewer: How about just starting this paragraph with `The behavior of a program that dereferences a null pointer is undefined.`?
This also flows very well with what follows.

> In such case the compiler no longer needs to adhere to the language standard, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In that case, the compiler no longer needs to adhere to the language standard
```

and the program has no meaning assigned to it.

> In practice dereference of null pointer may lead to program crashes, or the application may appear to execute correctly while losing data or producing incorrect results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, dereferencing a null pointer may lead to program crashes, or the application may appear to execute correctly while losing data or producing incorrect results.
```

Besides affecting the application's availability, null pointer dereferences may lead to code execution, in rare circumstances.
If null is equivalent to the ``++0x0++`` memory address that can be accessed by privileged code, writing, and reading memory is possible, which compromises the integrity and confidentiality of the application.

> == Hot to fix it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== How to fix it
```

Ensure that any pointer that is dereferenced by the program _is not_ null.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
char *p1 = ... ;

> if (p1 == NULL && *p1 == '\t') { // Noncompliant, p1 will be dereferenced IFF it is null

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if (p1 == NULL && *p1 == '\t') { // Noncompliant: p1 will be dereferenced IFF it is null
```

  // ...
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
char *p1 = ... ;

> if (p1 != NULL && *p1 == '\t') { // Compliant, *p1 cannot be evaluated when p1 is NULL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if (p1 != NULL && *p1 == '\t') { // Compliant: *p1 cannot be evaluated if p1 is NULL
```

  // ...
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,c,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
char *p2 = ... ;
if (p2 != NULL) {
    // ...
}

> p2[2] = '\t'; // Noncompliant; potential null-dereference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
p2[2] = '\t'; // Noncompliant; potential null-dereference
```
```suggestion
p2[2] = '\t'; // Noncompliant: potential null-dereference
```

----

==== Compliant solution

[source,c,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
char *p2 = ... ;
if (p2 != NULL) {
    // ...

>   p2[2] = '\t'; // Compliant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  p2[2] = '\t'; // Compliant: p2 is known to be non-null
```

}
----

=== Going the extra mile

> In {cpp}, it is preferred to use reference parameter (`Type const&` or `Type&`), or passing object by value (`Type`),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In {cpp}, it is preferred to use reference parameters (`Type const&` or `Type&`), or pass objects by value (`Type`),
```

> instead of a pointer (`Type const*` or `Type*`), when the argument is expected to never be null.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
instead of a pointer (`Type const*` or `Type*`), if the argument is expected to never be null.
```

[source,cpp]
----
// Precondition: graph != null
bool isDAG(Graph const* graph);
---- 

The preferred signature would be:

[source,cpp]
----
bool isDAG(Graph const& graph);
---- 

== Resources

=== Standards

* CERT - https://wiki.sei.cmu.edu/confluence/x/QdcxBQ[EXP34-C.Do not dereference null pointers]
* CERT - https://wiki.sei.cmu.edu/confluence/x/aDdGBQ[EXP01-J.Do not use a null in a case where an object is required]
* CWE - https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/476[476 NULL Pointer Dereference]

=== Related rules

> * S3807 detects calling a C library function that requires valid pointer, with a null pointer an argument

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* S3807 detects calls to C library functions that require valid, non-null pointers with null pointer arguments
```

> * S2637 detects passing of null pointer as an argument for a parameter that is annotated with `nonnull`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* S2637 detects uses of null pointers as arguments for parameters that are annotated with `nonnull`
```
